projects/clisp/clisp.md, before:

---
layout: default
title: Clisp - Lisp interpreter
permalink: /projects/clisp/index.html
group: projects
---
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	Source on <a href="https://github.com/LemonPi/Clisp">github</a><br>
	I find learning Scheme and functional programming languages to help 
	think about programs. Their emphasis on procedures and data's equivalence
	along with their lack of state enforces modular designs.
	There's also the great teaching resource accompanying it in the form of
	<a href="http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-001-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs-spring-2005/video-lectures/">SICP</a>.
</p>
<p>
	I made this interpreter explore runtime environments and <a href="#data">structures</a> for holding weakly typed data.
	This interpreter understands a subset of Lisp's Scheme dialect.
	The <a href="#environment">treatment of procedures and environments</a> is the most interesting part of this project.
	Procedures are made of data and a pointer to the frame they were defined in.
	Seeing run-time defined procedures in action was like magic :).
</p>
</div>

<h2 class="anchor">Instructions <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#instructions" name="instructions">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------

1. [**Get boost**](http://www.boost.org/users/download/) if you don't have it 
2. Clone code from [github](https://github.com/LemonPi/bincalc) or using cmd `git clone git://github.com/LemonPi/bincalc.git`
3. Build with `make` in the directory if you have g++(gcc) with c++11 support
4. Else either change (CC) in the makefile to your compiler of choice, or build with another tool
5. Run with `./clisp` or `./clisp [filename] [-p]` with -p to force printing during file evaluation, which by default is silent
6. Tips:
	- exit with `Ctrl + c`
	- don't define procedures as keywords: `define, lambda, cond, cons, car, cdr, cat, list, else, and, or, not`
	- prefix name with quote for string: `'string`
	- concatenate strings with `(cat 'something 'something_else)
	- expressions must be terminated with appropriate ), whitespace is ignored
	- put expression arguments at end of arglist (names, numbers, and strings in front) `(proc x anotherproc 5 'string (expr))` 


<div class="frames">
<img src="usage.png">
<p>Example usage</p>
</div>

With some definitions in funcs.scm:
<pre><code>(define compose (lambda (f g)
		(lambda (x)
				(f (g x)))))
(define (add x)
        (cond ((empty? x) 0)
              (else (+ (car x) (add (cdr x))))))				
(define expt (lambda (x n)
			  (cond ((= n 1) x)
					(else (* x 
							 (expt x (- n 1)))))))	
(define nth-power (lambda (n)
		(lambda (x)
				(expt x n))))	
(define square (nth-power 2))	
(define cube (nth-power 3))	
(define square\_and\_cube (compose square cube))</code></pre>

<h2 class="anchor">Strengths <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#strengths" name="strengths">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
 - relatively simple ~550 lines of non comment code with clearly separated components
 - highly modular design allows easy addition of features
 - concepts are clearly reflected in the implementation and representation 
	- driver loop prints the evaluated value of the read expression in the global environment 
	`cout << eval(expr(print_res), e0)`
	- a Cell could hold many different types of values, but only one at a time
	- a Procedure is a closure object implemented as a class holding a list as parameters, another list as body, and a pointer to defining frame (for non-local variables)
	- Environments are Env* (Env pointer) that point to a specific frame holding definitions and a pointer to its outer frame
	- arguments can be any cell, as long as the semantics is correct as defined in the proc

<h2 class="anchor">Room for Improvement <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#room_for_improvement" name="room_for_improvement">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
 - [Done] could pass an expression when there's an error in it rather than terminating the program (high priority)
 - could trim down Cell size to 24 bytes from 40 by storing List* instead of List in Cell 
 (but would have to store Lists on heap or custom stack, additional memory management)
 - could optimize tail recursion to allow deep recursion for certain procedure forms (currently stack is limited to around 20 levels)
 - requires expression arguments to be placed at end of arglist when mixed with other types of arguments
 - stack relies on C++'s implementation of stack, so adding call/cc (exceptions) and multi-threading would be troublesome and incomplete
 - extra 7 bytes of padding could be used to store relevant information
 - no garbage collection 

<h2 class="anchor">Lexer <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#lexer" name="lexer">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	This lexer is very similar to the last one I worked on for <a href="/portfolio/projects/bincalc/">bincalc</a>.
	It's stream based, giving fast speed and minimal memory usage. Manipulating long strings and operating on strings in general
	is inefficient in comparison. Files are also processed as streams, 
	so switching between user console input and file input is cheap.
</p>
<p>
	There are few ways to improve the Lexer.
	It's very independent - not calling other system components - and 
	efficient - it uses a character to look for hints on the type of the cell, 
	with a switch/case that hopefully is optimized into a jump table with O(1) complexity 
	(if not then binary search with O(log(n)) complexity).
</p>
</div>

<h2 class="anchor">Data Structure <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#data" name="data">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
Designing the data structure was the most challenging part of this project. <br>
I had some criteria for potential designs:  

 1. reflects concept of a single value cell (can't hold multiple values as once)
 2. cheap access and transportation (copying/moving/returning)
 3. space efficient
 4. safe runtime usage

One obvious design is to store every possible value into the Cell, leading to 

![full data cell](fulldatacell.png) 


<div class="text-block">
<p>
	Actual sizes vary based on platform and architecture, and string sizes depend on if 
	small string optimization is used (strings < 15 char stored on stack).
</p>
<p>
	This design minimizes redirections, which affects access time, and is very trivial to implement. 
	Ease of implementation makes the code clearer, easier to debug, and easier to add new features. 
	However, the overhead of 104 bytes per cell is exorbitant considering the bulk of it - the Proc - won't be used for most cells. 
	Reading and writing to memory is usually the bottleneck to application speed <a href="http://norvig.com/21-days.html#answers">[1]</a>.
</p>
</div>

-------------------------------
The other obvious design is to use polymorphism - having various Cell types share a common interface.

![polymorphic cell](polymorphiccell.png)

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	This design achieves the multi-type, single-value concept and decreases individual Cell sizes.
	However, it sacrifices implementation simplicity, requires additional memory management, and requires
	run time dynamic casting to safely use Cell values.
</p>
<p>
	This design doesn't offer enough improvements over the full data Cell to justify its use. 
	Dynamic casting is expensive, and so is the indirection from virtual function calls as a result of using Cells through an interface.
	Dealing with pointers and references also make the code convoluted, adding difficulty to debugging and feature addition.
</p>
</div>

-------------------------------
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	A <a href="http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-CA/library/5dxy4b7b.aspx">union</a> is ideal here. Unfortunately, the native C++ union requires
	its elements to be trivially constructed, so strings, vectors, and Proc can't be inside one. It's a low level construct
	that shouldn't be used in this case. 
</p>
<p>
	Fortunately, I learned that the <a href="http://www.boost.org/">boost library</a> provides a higher level union called variant.
</p>
</div>

![large variant cell](largevariantcell.png)

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	This design has some of polymorphism's benefits (smaller data size, true to concept of multi-type single-value), 
	as well as the benefits of the full data Cell (stack allocation, no virtual calls)
	<a href="http://www.bnikolic.co.uk/boostqf/variant.html">[2]</a>. 
</p>
<p>
	The variant was designed for similar requirements. Compared to polymorphic cells, it has larger average memory usage,
	but that's offset by its stack allocation and direct function calls in terms of efficiency. A slight improvement would be
	to store a Proc pointer instead of a full Proc, sacrificing a little indirection for less memory usage.
	Because most Cells do not contain procedures, the benefits from smaller memory footprint outweigh the benefits of one less indirection.
</p>
</div>

![variant cell](variantcell.png)

<h2 class="anchor">Environment Model <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#environment" name="environment">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	The run-time environment was the most interesting thing to work on.
	The environment dictates symbols' meanings; the scope is where a symbol is meaningful.
	A language can either have static or dynamic scoping. The difference is that free variables 
	(variables not an argument or local to a procedure) are defined where the procedure's declared for static scoping,
	and where the procedure's called for dynamic scoping.
</p>
<p>
	I wanted to implement static/lexical scoping because it allows modular procedures whereas in dynamic scoping
	each procedure's meaning depends on where it's called.
</p>
<p>
	As <a href="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/12029141/why-is-static-scoping-often-considered-better-than-dynamic-one">Andreas Rossberg</a> 
	explains, dynamic scoping violates the abstraction of procedures as functions (output solely dependent on input), 
	and hinders their composition.<br><br>
	Example from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scope_(computer_science)#Lexical_scope_vs._dynamic_scope">Wikipedia:</a>.
</p>
</div>
<pre><code>x=1
function g () { echo $x ; x=2 ; }
function f () { local x=3 ; g ; }
f # dynamic g has access to f's x and prints 3; lexical g prints 1 and modifies the global
echo $x # dynamic g modifies f's local x, so global x is 1, while lexical g modified x to be 2
</code></pre>

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	The way to implement lexical scoping was to create an environment every time a procedure is declared, which 
	is also where it's defined,
	and keep a pointer to the frame of its creation. Free variables are then looked up through that environment.
	This creates a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(computer_programming)">closure</a>, 
	and allows the use of higher order procedures and the idiom of returning procedures.
</p>
</div>
<pre><code>(define (nth-power n)
		(lambda (x)
				(expt x n)))) 	; n is bound to nth-power's n
				
(define square (nth-power 2)) 	
	
(define cube (nth-power 3))	

(cube 5)</code></pre>

![closure](environment.png)

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	Here are 4 environments, with environment II equal to III. Calling (cube 5) 
	results in the following actions:
</p>
</div>	
 1. 5 is bound to x, resolving to (expt 5 n) 
 2. n looked for through env IV, finds n = 3 in cube frame, resolving to (expt 5 3)
 3. expt would've been expanded out to primitives during nth-power's definition
 4. expression can be fully evaluated

<h2 class="anchor">Gains from Experience <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#gains" name="gains">&para;</a></h2>
-----------------------
 - C++ and functional programming experience
 - A lot of debugging experience...
 - Language design and processing experience
 - Understanding of run time environments
 - Introduction to 3rd party C++ libraries (boost)
 - Tons of fun

Commit message:

Updated clisp to talk about comment and include - new features

projects/clisp/clisp.md, after:

---
layout: default
title: Clisp - Lisp interpreter
permalink: /projects/clisp/index.html
group: projects
---
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	Source on <a href="https://github.com/LemonPi/Clisp">github</a><br>
	I find learning Scheme and functional programming languages to help 
	think about programs. Their emphasis on procedures and data's equivalence
	along with their lack of state enforces modular designs.
	There's also the great teaching resource accompanying it in the form of
	<a href="http://ocw.mit.edu/courses/electrical-engineering-and-computer-science/6-001-structure-and-interpretation-of-computer-programs-spring-2005/video-lectures/">SICP</a>.
</p>
<p>
	I made this interpreter explore runtime environments and <a href="#data">structures</a> for holding weakly typed data.
	This interpreter understands a subset of Lisp's Scheme dialect.
	The <a href="#environment">treatment of procedures and environments</a> is the most interesting part of this project.
	Procedures are made of data and a pointer to the frame they were defined in.
	Seeing run-time defined procedures in action was like magic :).
</p>
</div>

<h2 class="anchor">Instructions <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#instructions" name="instructions">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------

1. [**Get boost**](http://www.boost.org/users/download/) if you don't have it 
2. Clone code from [github](https://github.com/LemonPi/bincalc) or using cmd `git clone git://github.com/LemonPi/bincalc.git`
3. Build with `make` in the directory if you have g++(gcc) with c++11 support
4. Else either change (CC) in the makefile to your compiler of choice, or build with another tool
5. Run with `./clisp` or `./clisp [filename] [-p]` with -p to force printing during file evaluation, which by default is silent
6. Tips:
	- exit with `Ctrl + c`
	- comment with ; and ;; for start of line comments 
	- include files, which can themselves include other files, with `(include funcs.scm)`
	- don't clash with keywords: `define, lambda, cond, cons, car, cdr, cat, list, else, and, or, not, empty?, include`
	- prefix name with quote for string: `'string`
	- concatenate strings with `(cat 'something 'something_else)`
	- expressions must be terminated with appropriate ), whitespace is ignored
	- put expression arguments at end of arglist (names, numbers, and strings in front) `(proc x anotherproc 5 'string (expr))` 


<div class="frames">
<img src="usage.png">
<p>Example usage</p>
</div>

With some definitions in funcs.scm:
<pre><code>;; double semicolon for start of line comments
(include funcs.scm)	; essentially copy paste entire file here
(define compose (lambda (f g)
		(lambda (x)
				(f (g x)))))
(define (add x)
        (cond ((empty? x) 0)
              (else (+ (car x) (add (cdr x))))))				
(define expt (lambda (x n)
			  (cond ((= n 1) x)
					(else (* x 
							 (expt x (- n 1)))))))	
(define nth-power (lambda (n)
		(lambda (x)
				(expt x n))))	
(define square (nth-power 2))	
(define cube (nth-power 3))	
(define square\_and\_cube (compose square cube))</code></pre>

<h2 class="anchor">Strengths <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#strengths" name="strengths">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
 - relatively simple ~550 lines of non comment code with clearly separated components
 - highly modular design allows easy addition of features
	- added support for comments and file inclusion in about 5 extra lines
 - concepts are clearly reflected in the implementation and representation 
	- driver loop prints the evaluated value of the read expression in the global environment 
	`cout << eval(expr(print_res), e0)`
	- a Cell could hold many different types of values, but only one at a time
	- a Procedure is a closure object implemented as a class holding a list as parameters, another list as body, and a pointer to defining frame (for non-local variables)
	- Environments are Env* (Env pointer) that point to a specific frame holding definitions and a pointer to its outer frame
	- arguments can be any cell, as long as the semantics is correct as defined in the proc

<h2 class="anchor">Room for Improvement <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#room_for_improvement" name="room_for_improvement">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
 - [Done] could pass an expression when there's an error in it rather than terminating the program (high priority)
 - could trim down Cell size to 24 bytes from 40 by storing List* instead of List in Cell 
 (but would have to store Lists on heap or custom stack, additional memory management)
 - could optimize tail recursion to allow deep recursion for certain procedure forms (currently stack is limited to around 20 levels)
 - requires expression arguments to be placed at end of arglist when mixed with other types of arguments
 - stack relies on C++'s implementation of stack, so adding call/cc (exceptions) and multi-threading would be troublesome and incomplete
 - extra 7 bytes of padding could be used to store relevant information
 - no garbage collection 

<h2 class="anchor">Lexer <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#lexer" name="lexer">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	This lexer is very similar to the last one I worked on for <a href="/portfolio/projects/bincalc/">bincalc</a>.
	It's stream based, giving fast speed and minimal memory usage. Manipulating long strings and operating on strings in general
	is inefficient in comparison. Files are also processed as streams, 
	so switching between user console input and file input is cheap.
</p>
<p>
	There are few ways to improve the Lexer.
	It's very independent - not calling other system components - and 
	efficient - it uses a character to look for hints on the type of the cell, 
	with a switch/case that hopefully is optimized into a jump table with O(1) complexity 
	(if not then binary search with O(log(n)) complexity).
</p>
</div>

<h2 class="anchor">Data Structure <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#data" name="data">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
Designing the data structure was the most challenging part of this project. <br>
I had some criteria for potential designs:  

 1. reflects concept of a single value cell (can't hold multiple values as once)
 2. cheap access and transportation (copying/moving/returning)
 3. space efficient
 4. safe runtime usage

One obvious design is to store every possible value into the Cell, leading to 

![full data cell](fulldatacell.png) 


<div class="text-block">
<p>
	Actual sizes vary based on platform and architecture, and string sizes depend on if 
	small string optimization is used (strings < 15 char stored on stack).
</p>
<p>
	This design minimizes redirections, which affects access time, and is very trivial to implement. 
	Ease of implementation makes the code clearer, easier to debug, and easier to add new features. 
	However, the overhead of 104 bytes per cell is exorbitant considering the bulk of it - the Proc - won't be used for most cells. 
	Reading and writing to memory is usually the bottleneck to application speed <a href="http://norvig.com/21-days.html#answers">[1]</a>.
</p>
</div>

-------------------------------
The other obvious design is to use polymorphism - having various Cell types share a common interface.

![polymorphic cell](polymorphiccell.png)

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	This design achieves the multi-type, single-value concept and decreases individual Cell sizes.
	However, it sacrifices implementation simplicity, requires additional memory management, and requires
	run time dynamic casting to safely use Cell values.
</p>
<p>
	This design doesn't offer enough improvements over the full data Cell to justify its use. 
	Dynamic casting is expensive, and so is the indirection from virtual function calls as a result of using Cells through an interface.
	Dealing with pointers and references also make the code convoluted, adding difficulty to debugging and feature addition.
</p>
</div>

-------------------------------
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	A <a href="http://msdn.microsoft.com/en-CA/library/5dxy4b7b.aspx">union</a> is ideal here. Unfortunately, the native C++ union requires
	its elements to be trivially constructed, so strings, vectors, and Proc can't be inside one. It's a low level construct
	that shouldn't be used in this case. 
</p>
<p>
	Fortunately, I learned that the <a href="http://www.boost.org/">boost library</a> provides a higher level union called variant.
</p>
</div>

![large variant cell](largevariantcell.png)

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	This design has some of polymorphism's benefits (smaller data size, true to concept of multi-type single-value), 
	as well as the benefits of the full data Cell (stack allocation, no virtual calls)
	<a href="http://www.bnikolic.co.uk/boostqf/variant.html">[2]</a>. 
</p>
<p>
	The variant was designed for similar requirements. Compared to polymorphic cells, it has larger average memory usage,
	but that's offset by its stack allocation and direct function calls in terms of efficiency. A slight improvement would be
	to store a Proc pointer instead of a full Proc, sacrificing a little indirection for less memory usage.
	Because most Cells do not contain procedures, the benefits from smaller memory footprint outweigh the benefits of one less indirection.
</p>
</div>

![variant cell](variantcell.png)

<h2 class="anchor">Environment Model <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#environment" name="environment">&para;</a></h2>
-------------------------------
<div class="text-block">
<p>
	The run-time environment was the most interesting thing to work on.
	The environment dictates symbols' meanings; the scope is where a symbol is meaningful.
	A language can either have static or dynamic scoping. The difference is that free variables 
	(variables not an argument or local to a procedure) are defined where the procedure's declared for static scoping,
	and where the procedure's called for dynamic scoping.
</p>
<p>
	I wanted to implement static/lexical scoping because it allows modular procedures whereas in dynamic scoping
	each procedure's meaning depends on where it's called.
</p>
<p>
	As <a href="http://stackoverflow.com/questions/12029141/why-is-static-scoping-often-considered-better-than-dynamic-one">Andreas Rossberg</a> 
	explains, dynamic scoping violates the abstraction of procedures as functions (output solely dependent on input), 
	and hinders their composition.<br><br>
	Example from <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scope_(computer_science)#Lexical_scope_vs._dynamic_scope">Wikipedia:</a>.
</p>
</div>
<pre><code>x=1
function g () { echo $x ; x=2 ; }
function f () { local x=3 ; g ; }
f # dynamic g has access to f's x and prints 3; lexical g prints 1 and modifies the global
echo $x # dynamic g modifies f's local x, so global x is 1, while lexical g modified x to be 2
</code></pre>

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	The way to implement lexical scoping was to create an environment every time a procedure is declared, which 
	is also where it's defined,
	and keep a pointer to the frame of its creation. Free variables are then looked up through that environment.
	This creates a <a href="http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Closure_(computer_programming)">closure</a>, 
	and allows the use of higher order procedures and the idiom of returning procedures.
</p>
</div>
<pre><code>(define (nth-power n)
		(lambda (x)
				(expt x n)))) 	; n is bound to nth-power's n
				
(define square (nth-power 2)) 	
	
(define cube (nth-power 3))	

(cube 5)</code></pre>

![closure](environment.png)

<div class="text-block">
<p>
	Here are 4 environments, with environment II equal to III. Calling (cube 5) 
	results in the following actions:
</p>
</div>	
 1. 5 is bound to x, resolving to (expt 5 n) 
 2. n looked for through env IV, finds n = 3 in cube frame, resolving to (expt 5 3)
 3. expt would've been expanded out to primitives during nth-power's definition
 4. expression can be fully evaluated

<h2 class="anchor">Gains from Experience <a class="anchor-link" title="permalink to section" href="#gains" name="gains">&para;</a></h2>
-----------------------
 - C++ and functional programming experience
 - A lot of debugging experience...
 - Language design and processing experience
 - Understanding of run time environments
 - Introduction to 3rd party C++ libraries (boost)
 - Tons of fun
